9.1
 INTRODUCTION
The boundary layer of a flowing fluid is the thin layer close to the wall. In a flow field,
viscous stresses are very prominent within this layer. Although the layer is thin, it is
very important to know the details of flow within it. The main-flow velocity within this
layer tends to zero while approaching the wall. Also the gradient of this velocity
component in a direction normal to the surface is large as  compared to the gradient of
this component in the streamwise direction.
9.2
 BOUNDARY LAYER EQUATIONS
In 1904, Ludwig Prandtl, the well-known German scientist, introduced the concept of
boundary layer [1] and derived the equations for boundary layer flow by correct
reduction of the Navier–Stokes equations. He hypothesised that for fluids having a
relatively small viscosity, the effect of internal fictitious in the fluid is significant only
in a narrow region surrounding the solid boundaries or bodies over which the fluid
flows. Thus, close to the body is the boundary layer where shear stresses exert an
increasingly larger effect on the fluid as one moves from free stream towards the solid
boundary. However, outside the boundary layer where the effect of the shear stresses
on the flow is small compared to values inside the boundary layer (since the velocity
gradient ∂u/∂y is negligible), the fluid particles experience no vorticity, and therefore,
the flow is similar to a potential flow. Hence, the surface at the boundary layer
interface is a rather fictitious one dividing rotational and irrotational flow. Prandtl’s
model regarding the boundary layer flow is shown in Fig. 9.1. Hence with the
exception of the immediate vicinity of the surface, the flow is frictionless (inviscid)
and the velocity is U. In the region very near to the surface (in the thin layer), there is
friction in the flow which signifies that the fluid is retarded until it adheres to the
surface. The transition of the mainstream velocity from zero at the surface to full
magnitude takes place across the boundary layer. Its thickness is d which is a function
of the coordinate direction x. The thickness is considered to be very small compared
to the characteristic length L of the domain. In the normal direction, within the thin
layer, the gradient ∂u/∂y is very large compared to the gradient in the flow direction
∂u/∂x. The next step is to simplify the Navier–Stokes equations for steady two-
9
LAMINAR BOUNDARY LAYERS
